In this video I won't be covering any new syntax or features that we haven't seen.
I just want to give us some practice and a little bit of time to talk about objects methods designing
our code why we might want to use objects with methods and comparing that to different approaches that
we've already seen so early in the course.
When we're talking about functions.
We had a functions exercise where I asked you to make a function called it was something like make deck
and I wanted it to return a deck of cards which was an array and each element had a value like value
of five and then a suit of hearts or diamonds or something.
So five of hearts.
But the deck would have fifty two of these each different right and we'd have five of hearts five of
diamonds five of clubs and spades and then six and seven and Jack all those different cards.
So that's the idea and we can totally use a function to do that just a standalone function.
But what if I wanted to also have different features different functionality for my deck instead of
just making a deck of cards.
What if I wanted to be able to draw a single card at a time.
Or maybe I want to have a discard pile.
Once we draw a card we could put it in the discard pile.
So our deck would be shrinking but then we would have the discard pile that was keeping all of the previously
drawn cards or I could implement a shuffle so that we could shuffle the deck.
Or what if I wanted to refill the deck.
Start over from scratch.
There's so many different things we could do.
We could make a Draw method that could take an argument like draw five draw to draw one and to design
that to actually implement it we could start with a pure function approach so I could have my make deck
function which I need to actually call a function and then I would loop over these two variables that
I've created already to save some time here.
I have suits which is an array and values which I made a string instead of an array only to save a little
bit of time because typing this as an array is really annoying having to do one and then two and put
quotes around everything.
And I did separate them by commas because that allows me if I come over here to do values dot split
on the comma and get an array with the actual values.
The reason I had to do commas instead of just doing one two three four five six seven eight nine jack
queen king is this little guy right here 10.
If I were to iterate over this string I would get each character one at a time and that works.
All of these values are a single character long except for 10.
So if I were to split if I had 10 in here or if I were to iterate over this it would do 1 and 0 I wouldn't
actually get 10.
So that's why I used the string with commas but I'm going to start by looping over suits my goal is
to return an object that has a suit set to one of these suits and a value set to one of these suits
and make them all unique.
So we have a combination of every possible you have an instance of every possible combination.
So for let's value of and then I'm going to do values that split on the comma.
So that gives me this array here.
So for every item in that array we'll also loop over suits for that suit of suits and then I'm going
to create a deck array appear concept deck.
We'll start empty and then in here I will call decked out push and I'll push on a new object where we
have value set to value and suit set to suit.
Coming from these loops but as we just saw very very recently we have a shorthand way of doing this.
If we want the key name to be value and we have a variable called value.
I can just put value and suit.
All right so let's return this deck return deck.
Run my code.
Make deck.
Forgot my parents and we're fifty six.
What did I mess up here.
Well that was stupid.
I put Ace and won.
There is no one card.
So let's run it one more time.
Hopefully you saw that before me.
Now we have 52 cards.
Okay so we have this function.
Still no objects or methods involved.
Yes we do have this object that we're creating but no methods no this none of the stuff we've been talking
about.
If I wanted to create a deck and then be able to draw a single card I would need to save this deck to
a variable.
So make a new deck.
We'll go with concept.
My deck equals make deck and then I need to make a new function called draw card
and I would need to pass in the card.
Excuse me pass passing the deck as an argument and then we draw the card so we could do.
Let's pop from the end I guess.
Or we could take from the beginning.
Either one works but let's just pop one off.
So deck dot pop and if we try it over here make decked out pop remember that pop returns the value and
it also changes the original array so I can simply return decked out Pop.
Okay so in order to draw a single card I make the deck and then I need to call draw card and pass in
my deck because we need an argument here.
So then I would save that return result to concert card 1 equals draw card and if I run it I take a
look at card 1 we've got the ace of clubs we haven't shuffled our cards at all.
So they're all in order.
And then if we look at my deck it should now be fifty one items.
So then to draw card again I have to do draw a card pass in my deck and this is not great to have to
keep passing this around and I'm passing my deck into draw card over and over and over.
And if I were to have a shuffle function or a refill deck or draw five I would need to keep passing
my deck.
I guess the alternative would be to use global variables and make a variable up top called my deck.
My deck equals make deck and then instead of all of the functions we write we could refer to my deck
specifically but that's even worse because then we end up with just one deck.
I could do this concept main deck equals make deck and then I would.
Down here.
Rewrite draw card to just return.
Main Deck.
Dot pop.
But you can imagine that this is severely limited.
We can only have one deck main deck.
How would I make deck 2 or second deck or fifth deck.
I would have to write a new function that didn't depend on it.
I would write a new one where I hardcoded in second deck so that's not a good approach.
So the best option for now is to keep passing them around.
Pass the deck in so that we can make a draw card.
Somewhat modular.
Now this is where objects come in because I can use an object to store the deck and on that object I
can have a method called draw a card and another one called shuffle and we have access to the deck.
Because of this the keyword this so here is how I would rewrite that I would do something like const
deck or my deck or whatever equals an object and then I would have the property instead of calling this
deck.
Let's go with my deck and then make our property deck which can start as an empty array.
Then we'll have a new method that will add in called Make deck or refill cards or something.
But should we call it initialize cards.
Initialize deck.
Sure.
And it is going to update the deck property.
So we're grouping the data with functionality so let's just copy most of this logic over.
Just move this over and it's not going to work right away.
We need to change a couple of things.
The first thing I might do is move these variables into properties on the object because we might want
them and other methods we don't need to re declare them every time we call initialized deck.
So I'm going to just copy this out.
Cut it out make a property called suits and then another one called values and move that will get rid
of that right there and then we can import them.
We're not actually importing but we can use them in here because of this.
So this dot suits this dot values.
We could also just use that restructuring so concept suits common values equals this and let's also
grab deck.
So now every time I reference deck it's actually this deck values is this values I've just restructured
them.
What do I have going on here missing a comma.
There we go.
Okay so I have those values now.
So for that value of value stock split.
That's right.
We get an array for each value we're also going to iterate over all the suits all four.
And now I can leave this as desktop push instead of having to do this dot deck because we d structured
it up here.
Where are you right there.
And then we can return the deck if we want but also we don't have to.
We're not going to lose that deck versus here.
We had to return the deck and save it to a variable.
Otherwise we're just making this array and then it disappears when the function is over.
But in our object we're actually changing the property of deck.
We're adding to this array.
So even if I don't return deck it still should work assuming I didn't mess something up when I copied
it over.
Let's see what happens now.
I have this my deck which is an object.
It starts with an empty array but if I call my deck dot initialized deck kind of a long name.
Let's look at my deck.
Now or how about just my deck dot deck.
We have 52 cards so we successfully implemented this method that is updating the deck property.
And now if I wanted to implement a draw method it's very easy.
I'll just add my comma in draw card.
And why don't we make this a little bit more exciting.
Well we'll start with draw a single card so draw a card and we'll access this dot deck and then we'll
pop one off and we'll return that so that we have access to the card.
That was just drawn.
But now we also are updating this dot deck so I don't have to pass anything around if I want to use
it.
I just do my deck dot and let's initialize the deck and then we'll also do my deck dots and then draw
a single card.
We can save this to a variable cost card oops I didn't add my parents and I'm going to get an error
if I use concert again because they already declared card.
Oh jeez I'm an idiot.
We can't update cost.
All right well let's go to a different name contest card one equals my deck dot draw card and we'll
get card 1.
We have that card that we drew and if we look at the deck itself my deck dot deck where are you.
We now have fifty one cards.
So notice we didn't have to pass an argument around.
We didn't have to do what we did here where every time I want to draw a card I have to pass in the deck
we're drawing it from.
Instead we group the method with the values we put the data and the functionality in a single object.
So now all we have to do is access this dot deck and we're updating this one object.
This whole thing represents a deck of cards and we have different things we can do with the data.
We can initialize it again.
We can draw a card and let's actually add a new method that will draw multiple cards.
And before we do that let's add a discard pile or a drawn card pile where we can keep track of the cards
that have already been drawn.
So instead of just returning this dot decked out pup we will pop an element off will pop a card off.
But before we return it we'll also make sure to add it to the drawn cards so drawn cards can start as
an empty array.
And then here when we draw a new card we'll do this dot decked up Pop.
But we'll push that on to the drawing cards array so we could just put this in a variable called name
card equals this dot decked out pop and then we can do this dot drawn cards dot push card and then return
card so now if we run it my deck out initialized deck my deck dot draw the first card we'll draw a couple.
Now let's look at my deck.
We have drawn cards right here and it has six elements six cards that we've drawn and now if I want
to make a method to draw multiple cards you could just make draw cards or draw multiple which will be
a method we'll pass in a number of cards.
Name cards.
Make sure to add my comma here and then I would just loop num cards times and take advantage of our
draw card method.
We already have.
So let's do a regular for loop.
For that I equals zero.
I less than name cards.
I plus plus.
And then we want to call this dot draw card.
This method here this draws a single card and adds it to the drawing cards array and it returned to
that card.
So we'll call that multiple times.
But we want to return all of the cards that we're drawing.
So if somebody says draw eight cards draw multiple of eight.
We want to have an array.
We'll just call this concept cards that we return.
So we'll draw the card and push that onto cards.
Cards not push the card that we get back from draw single card draw card and then at the end we will
return cards.
Let's see if that one works.
So we have my deck dot initialized deck and then my deck dot draw multiple of four.
We get back in array with four cards.
Let's look at my deck.
Does it in fact have a smaller deck.
Yes it does.
We're down to 48 and drawn cards has four elements.
Cool.
Next we'll add a shuffle method.
Now I've gone ahead and written a simple shuffle method shuffling things is actually not as straightforward
as you might think.
There is a ton of ways of doing it.
And sometimes you run into issues with randomness and random numbers not being as random as they should
be.
So this is not by any means the best shuffle that there ever is.
But I want to walk through how it works in like 30 seconds.
This is an algorithm called the Fisher Yates shuffle.
It's used to shuffle an array and I'm going to console that log in this loop the array that we pass
in so you can see how it works.
I'm going to call shuffle on this array of strings and we can see what happens each step of the way.
So we loop over the array backwards.
We start at the end of the array.
So the original array looks like this.
So we're starting with F and then we pick a random index before F so any of these and we swap the two.
So the choice that was made the first time through is B.
So we swapped F and B and then the loop moves on to this letter E or this index and we swap it with
something before it we pick a random index between zero and whatever this index is and we swap.
So we swapped with C that time.
So then we move on to this index.
And so we're shuffling it from the back moving towards the front.
We swap with some random index before and then we move on.
We swap something before move on and we end up with this.
And if I call it again we'll likely get something different.
As you can see there.
So not the focus so much of this video but here is a simple implementation if you want definitely look
into more complex implementations.
It's it's kind of fun different ways of shuffling but I'll just add some quick notes loop over array
backwards and then here pick random index before current elements and then swap.
Now this right here is a nice shorthand way of swapping elements using these structuring to want to
get too sidetracked here but I'll show it to you briefly if we have this array from earlier.
We'll call it letters.
If I run this line let's do letters of zero comma letters of how about three.
So that should be a and d equals and then do the inverse letters of three comma letters of zero.
What this will do is swap out elements in place.
And if we look at letters now D is now where a used to be and a is now where D used to be the shuffle
is not really the focus of the video but in order to make our deck slightly more useful we should add
shuffle.
So let's go ahead and do it we'll add in our method shuffle which I need to change and a couple different
ways.
First I need to make it a valid method on our object.
I'm not going to pass in an array.
It should just shuffle the deck.
Right.
It shouldn't shuffle an array.
We pass in.
So anytime I have that reference to a R I'm going to replace it with deck.
So I mean a d structure deck.
This I don't know why I'm writing this backwards concept deck equals this.
So that is d structuring the deck out of this and then we're going to replace array that time.
There they are there with deck.
So now we have a shuffle method this deck.
We don't have to pass anything in.
Let's make sure it works.
So my deck got initialized deck.
And as we've already seen the way we built the initialize is that it just puts them all in order.
So we have.
What is it.
Two of hearts and then three of hearts and then four of hearts.
Or do I do it backwards.
I think we have two of hearts Two of diamonds two of spades.
But let's just look.
So we do my deck deck.
Open this up and we have all the twos all the threes the fours.
So let's shuffle my deck dot shuffle.
Fingers crossed you didn't mess anything up.
Let's look at my deck and open up deck.
There we go.
Totally shuffled.
Awesome.
So hopefully you can see from this example that putting our code in an object is not something we always
need to do.
It's not the end all be all.
There's lots of these different patterns out there for organizing your code or for structuring designing
your code.
This is just one option where we put things in an object and this is still a very very simple version.
There are other patterns we'll talk about once we get to prototypes once we talk about creating constructor
functions and working with JavaScript classes which is all coming later on but this is this is still
nice right.
We don't have to pass anything around.
I will quickly I'll fast forward through this.
You don't have to watch but I will read implement all of this outside of an object and show you how
we would achieve the exact same thing and we can compare how ugly the code is or isn't.
All right.
So we took our objects from down here that we created my deck and I rewrote it as just standalone functions.
So we have our initialized deck.
This used to be called Make deck but I renamed it just to match what we have in our object initialized
deck created the the deck of cards in order.
Then I have draw card and we need to pass in the deck and if we want to keep track of the drawn cards
the cards that have already been drawn from the deck we need to pass in a second array called drawing
cards.
If I want to draw multiple I need to pass in the number of cards to draw the deck to draw from in the
array to put the drawn cards in that pile of cards that have already been drawn.
For shuffle and into passing the deck.
So here's what it looks like when I start using it I'll have things like draw multiple pass in the number
of cards to draw the deck the array that I'm drawing from and the drawing cards array that I've made
an empty array called drawing cards.
So every time I want to draw a card I mean I have to pass in all of these arguments if I want to get
a new hand let's call it const poker hand equals.
I guess most poker hands are five cards.
Let's go with blackjack.
I was going to say how it's going all right B.J. hand but that might not be.
Hmm.
I guess we'll go with poker hand equals draw multiple I guess we can draw two for each of these and
then our poker hand will draw five.
We need to pass in the deck that I made up here and the drawn cards array.
So this gets pretty tiresome not to mention if I want another deck it's really annoying because I'm
going to have to keep making these variables and I'm gonna have to keep track of them and pass in the
correct drawn cards.
I have two different decks.
I'll have one drawn cards array for one deck and a second one.
We haven't seen how we can use our object and use it to make multiple decks from it.
So we'll get to that in the next video.
But for now here we go.
This is one approach.
No objects except for the actual cards themselves which are an object with a value in a suit.
Everything else is functions or passing things around.
It gets kind of annoying but let's take a look.
Make sure it all works.
We've got our deck has 43 cards left because we drew nine of them.
If we look at hand one it has two cards.
Also the deck should be shuffled because I called it right called shuffle.
If we look at poker hand it has five cards and if we look at drawn cards it should have nine cards so
that's all great.
Now down to our object version to do the exact same thing we just see what we did we drew to two and
then five to replicate that.
We would call my deck dot initialized deck my deck dot shuffle my deck dot draw multiple and we'll do
two and we can save that to a variable concept we'll call it each one for a hand 1 h 2 to draw 2 and
then each 3 will draw 5 and that's it.
We don't have to keep passing a bunch of arguments in afterwards like we did here.
It's a lot easier because all of the relevant information all the values are stored together in my deck.
I don't have to manage the drawn cards versus the deck array.
I have it together.
It's all here versus in this example.
I have to keep track of drawn cards myself pass it around.
It's just not ideal.
So I recognize this has been extremely long and probably not the most enthralling video I've ever made
but it gets at some very important stuff that using objects is a great way of organizing your code of
grouping content together or a better way of saying it is grouping values with functionality things
with actions and we group them together in a logical way where we can start writing our methods or functions
in a clean syntax where I don't have to pass a bunch of stuff in I don't have to save everything to
a new variable because everything is done on the object itself.
The object stores those values and then these methods act upon those values.
Thanks to our good friend this.
Next up we'll see how we can create multiple decks.
Right now I'm stuck with one deck that is probably the big disadvantage to what we saw up here.
Here I can make another deck at any point by just calling initialize deck.
I still have to write a bunch of code to get the deck.
Make a new drawing cards shuffle the second deck but I can do it.
Here we have one object.
So how do we make another one of these.
That's what we'll see next.